---
title: "Motion: Preferential Voting in Committee Elections - UBES Constitution"
github_link: "https://github.com/ubes-exped/constitution/pull/6"
---

# Constitution of the University of Bristol Expeditions Society

## Name

1. The name of the Society shall be the University of Bristol Expeditions Society.
2. The Society shall be recognised by the University of Bristol Students’ Union.

## Aims

For the purpose of this document, expeditions are defined as adventurous outdoor activities based around physical challenges and exploration, particularly of remote and mountainous regions, such as hill walking, scrambling, climbing and mountaineering.

1. To encourage interest and participation in expeditions and their planning in the UK and worldwide.
2. To facilitate the organisation, financing and equipping of expeditions.
3. To organise expeditions and expedition training events for the benefit of the Members of the Society.
4. To acquire and maintain any items, equipment, property or documentation appropriate to the Society’s principal aims.
5. To promote research of remote places, and provide for the dissemination of knowledge and information so found.
6. To promote the wider expeditions community and encourage participation within this.
7. To form links with other societies, associations or bodies, with similar or complementary aims to facilitate the achievement of the foregoing.
8. To arrange social events for members and friends of the Society as the Committee may decide appropriate, and promote joint events with other societies, associations and bodies as the Committee deem fit.
9. To abide by the Union’s Code of Conduct.

## Membership

1. Full membership is open to all members of the Union by application to the Secretary of the Expeditions Society.
2. All other persons who are interested in the aims and objectives of the Society may request to associate as Friends of the Society, subject to the sole discretion of the Executive Committee. Only Society members with full membership (i.e. fee paying to, and members of the University of Bristol Student’s Union) are able to take part in trips in a full capacity. Friends of the Society may request to take part in some aspects of trips (e.g. by organising their own transport and/or accommodation) but must do so with substantial independence, at their own expense, and should agree to contribute to any shared costs (such as any shared accommodation, food or transport) before the trip leaves. The quorate Executive Committee reserves the right to disallow any person or persons from participating in any activity for any reason, except where it would be unlawful under discrimination laws or contrary to Union byelaws. In exceptional circumstances and at the sole discretion of the Executive Committee (including but not necessarily limited to alumni who have given substantial benefit to the Society), the Executive Committee may occasionally permit Friends of the Society to take part in trips in a full capacity.
3. All persons participating in activities are required to be insured to an appropriate extent as determined by the Executive Committee (for example, but not necessarily limited to, public liability insurance). Regardless of their membership or student status, any person who the Executive Committee reasonably believes is not covered sufficiently by University, Students’ Union, or Society insurance policies, must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Executive Committee that they have appropriate insurance arrangements in place prior to and for the duration of the activities.
4. Not less than two-thirds of the Society members shall be full members of the University of Bristol Students’ Union.
5. The secretary shall keep a list of all members.
6. There shall be a subscription fee levied for membership, which shall be fixed at the discretion of the Expeditions Society Committee being no less than the minimum rate demanded by the Societies Network.

## Privileges of Membership

1. Any full member of the Expeditions Society may sit on the Expeditions Society Committee.
2. All members shall have equal rights of voting, attending meetings etc.

## Committee

There shall be a Committee of the Expeditions Society which shall be the executive decision making body of the society.

1. The Committee size is to be defined as inclusive of all official roles, as stated below.
2. The President, the Vice President, the Treasurer and the Secretary must be current students of the University of Bristol during their term of office.
3. The Committee shall be jointly and severally responsible for the general and financial policy of the society, subject to such rules as laid out in the Union’s Constitution and Byelaws.
4. Quoracy for Committee meetings shall be set at 50% of the post filled positions plus one.
5. In the case of an official vote which is tied, the President shall carry the casting vote, provided the meeting is quorate.
6. Only persons duly elected to roles defined in this Constitution shall be permitted to vote on matters in meetings of the Committee. 
7. It is requirement that at least one of the Climbing Officers has completed, or intends to complete before the end of TB1 of their term of office, the Rock Climber Instructor (RCI) Training (formerly SPA). The Committee is to fund the training of at least one Climbing Officer, at their discretion.

Positions held on the Committee and their main roles are as follows:

### President

1. Organising and chairing Committee meetings
2. Risk assessment with the Kit and Safety officer
3. Liaising with the Union
4. Organise Bristol SU Welcome Week and the introductory presentation e.Organise weekend trips
5. Encourage and ensure all members feel welcome, accepted and supported in accordance with the equalities officer role.

### Vice President

1. Support the President and deputise for all President roles above
2. Manage the training subsidies
3. Organise lectures on expeditions related topics
4. Organise weekends trips
5. Encourage and ensure all members feel welcome, accepted and supported in accordance with the equalities officer role.

### Treasurer

1. Keep the accounts in order
2. Liaise with union treasurer and bank
3. End of year audit
4. Roles outlined in Financials below
5. Organise weekend trips

### Secretary

1. Agenda and minutes of all meetings
2. Updating members list and mailing lists
3. Membership enquiries
4. Newsletter
5. Organise and chair AGM
6. Organise weekend trips
7. Oversee the Alumni network, and support the Development Officer in its management.

### Climbing Officer (2 positions)

1. Oversee teaching of novice climbers
2. Ensure climbing happens in the club in a safe and correct manner
3. Organise climbing trips
4. Organise weekend trips

### Social Secretary (2 positions)

1. Organise Social events
2. Organise weekend trips
3. Promote joint social events with other societies, associations and bodies as the Committee deem fit.

### General Kit and Safety Officer

1. Managing the Society kit and keeping an accurate record of purchase and usage
2. Liaising with sponsors and organising kit discount evenings
3. Ensuring safe practice -route book, risk assessment etc.
4. Organise weekend trips

### Climbing Kit and Safety Officer

1. Managing the climbing kit and keeping an accurate record of purchase and usage
2. Liaising with sponsors and organising kit discount evenings
3. Ensuring safe practice -rope log book, route book, risk assessment etc.
4. Organise weekend trips

### Expeditions Officer (2 Positions)

1. Organise the winter expedition
2. Encourage others to run their own trips
3. Either organise and lead the summer expedition or provide the support to others who wish to do so
4. Organise weekend trips
5. Organise training promoting the development of essential skills relevant to all non-climbing-related activities (e.g. walk leader training).

### Development Officer

1. Champion and, where appropriate, organise new activities and opportunities which shall develop the Society and are related to its overall mission.
2. Encourage and facilitate the wider Society membership in their own relevant endeavors, and act as an ambassador for the Society for interested people in the University.
3. Work towards a set of development objectives proposed by the role holder and agreed upon by the Committee at the start of the year, which may include:
   1. Organising lectures on expeditions-related topics.
   2. Organise training promoting the development of skills relevant to advanced expeditions.
   3. Encourage and assist others to undertake their own expeditions through the running of planning workshops.
   4. Organising an ambitious or research-based expedition.
4. Manage a ‘Development Budget’ to assist in achieving these objectives. The budget shall be defined each year by the Committee and shall be commensurate with the costed development objectives, and with the Society’s financial standing.
   1. Note: all expenditure must be pre-authorised by the President, or by the Committee if it exceeds a threshold set by the Committee (at the same time as the budget is set). Ultimate responsibility for this budget lies with the President, but day-to-day responsibility shall be with the Development Officer.
   2. At least half of this expenditure should be designed to benefit the majority of active Society members.
5. Promote the highest reasonable standards of safety in all activities.
6. Manage the development of the Alumni network, with the support of the Secretary.a.Ultimate responsibility for the Alumni network shall lie with the Secretary, but day-to-day responsibility shall be with the Development Officer.
7. Organise weekend trips

### Postgraduate Officer (2 Positions)

1. Encourage postgraduate involvement in the society
2. Organise socials for postgraduate members
3. Organise trips for postgraduate members
4. Organise weekend trips

### Webmaster

1. Maintain and update the website and its contents
2. Organise weekend trips

## Honorary Officers

The Committee may appoint as Honorary President and Vice-President, any persons who have made significant contributions to the expedition and exploration movement within the University or nationally/internationally.

### Appointed Honorary Officers

| Name                 | Position appointed | Date appointed |
| :------------------- | :----------------- | :------------- |
| Robert Wragge-Morley | Honorary President | 11/07/2014     |
| George Cave          | Honorary President | 11/07/2014     |
| Jonathan Walsh       | Honorary President | 27/04/2019     |

## Finances

1. The Treasurer of the Society shall be a full member of the Union and not in their final year at the University, except exceptionally at the discretion of the Societies Network.
2. The accounts of the Society shall be audited by a member of University staff and submitted to the Bristol SU Finance Team as and when requested and at least once per annum.
3. All financial arrangements must be made in accordance with current instructions to Society Treasurers, as set down by the Societies Network.
4. The Bristol SU Union Affairs Officer, Sport and Student Development Officer and Director of Finance and Administration shall jointly be empowered to issue financial instructions on behalf of the Society if:
   1. The Society folds with outstanding financial affairs, or
   2. Change of mandate forms are not completed, and the previous Committee are out of reasonable contact, or
   3. Financial irregularities are found.

## General Meetings

1. There shall be an Annual General Meeting (AGM) once per annum and this should be the last weekend of the University of Bristol Easter vacation.
2. Notice of such meetings must be given by email at least seven days beforehand, together with the Agenda.
3. An Extraordinary General Meeting (EGM) may be called by 5% of the membership of the Society by application to the Secretary. An EGM shall be called as specified on the application, but at least 7 days’ notice shall be given.
4. Quorum of such meetings shall be set at twice the Committee size, plus one.
5. Only full members, not Friends of the Society, are to be considered "eligible voters". Only eligible voters should be counted during any AGM or EGM or in the process of calling for an EGM.

## Elections

1. Elections shall be held at the Annual General Meeting to elect officers of the Committee for the following session.
2. There shall be provision for by-elections for positions unfilled at the AGM to be held at an EGM in October.
3. An EGM must be called if the held Committee positions are not in line with Bristol SU regulations.
4. Any restrictions on who can stand must be stated – note that such restrictions must not contravene the Code of Conduct.
6. The default system of voting shall be First Past the Post ("FPTP"), for ease of counting only. Where FPTP is used as the system of voting, it shall be defined as follows.
   1. Eligible voters shall cast (up to) the same number of votes as there are positions to be filled.
   2. Each vote shall indicate the selected candidate(s).
   3. In a multi-position election, each voter may not vote more than once for any candidate. However, voters may cast multiple votes for the re-open nominations option ("RON"), provided the total number of votes cast does not exceed (i). Multiple votes for RON from a voter shall be tallied against multiple RON options.
   4. The number of votes received for each candidate is counted, and the highest-polling candidate(s) corresponding to the number of positions to be filled are elected.
7. However, it is recognized that the Single Transferable Vote ("STV") system of voting is typically a fairer way of electing candidates, though requires a more intensive counting process. If one or more of the following apply prior to the commencement of each election, then STV must be used as the system of voting for that election instead of FPTP.

   1. The Chairperson decides in their sole authority to require the use of the STV system of voting for that election, and/or
   2. Any eligible voter requests the use of the STV system of voting for that election, provided that voter can demonstrate support from a number of eligible voters (including themselves) of no less than 10% of the quorum threshold (as defined by 8(d)). For the avoidance of doubt, this refers to 10% of threshold required for quoracy, not 10% of the number of eligible voters present.

   These criteria shall apply on a per-role basis, so different systems of voting may be used for each election within one General Meeting. There shall be no limit as to the number of elections conducted using either system of voting, provided the criteria for doing so are duly observed.

8. The Chairperson must give eligible voters a reasonable opportunity to request the use of STV prior to the commencement of each election. Provided this reasonable opportunity is duly given, it shall not be permitted to change retrospectively the system of voting after the commencement of that election.
9. In the event that the STV system of voting is used, it shall be used as defined by the Electoral Reform Society of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ('How to conduct an election by the Single Transferable Vote', 3rd Edition, June 1997).
10. The system of voting used for each election shall be recorded in the minutes of the General Meeting. Where STV is used as the system of voting, it shall also be recorded which criterion (or criteria) applied prior to the commencement of that election which caused STV to be used.
11. All ballots must include the option to re-open nominations ("RON"). Should RON be elected, the post will remain vacant until a by-election is duly held. Alternatively, provided at least one additional eligible candidate is subsequently nominated, the Chairperson may decide in their sole authority to commence a second round election for that role, which shall be only for the position(s) to which RON was elected in the first round. For the avoidance of doubt, candidates duly elected in the first round are not affected. This may happen at most once for each role in any General Meeting.
12. If RON is elected in a multi-seat election where STV is used as the system of voting, any surplus of votes for RON above the threshold to be elected will be allocated directly to an additional RON candidate (instead of being distributed to other candidates according to subsequent preferences). In this way, it shall be possible to elect multiple RON candidates for a multi-seat election where STV is used.
13. For the avoidance of doubt, the only roles which are to be elected as a multi-position election are those defined in Section 5 (Committee) which include "(_n_ positions)" in their definition, where _n_ is the number of positions to be elected. All other roles (including but not limited to President and Vice-President) are to be elected as a series of single-position elections.
14. The Chairperson of the General Meeting to have the casting vote in the event of a tie, having not voted previously.
16. Eligible voters who are unable to vote synchronously at the election are entitled to submit their voting intention in advance to the Chairperson. The Chairperson shall then be required to ensure these votes are duly counted alongside synchronous votes. The Chairperson may set a deadline of no more than 7 days prior to the election for these submissions. In submitting their voting intention, voters shall be encouraged to submit an intention for both FPTP and STV systems of voting.
    1. If the voter submits a voting intention for both FPTP and STV, then the appropriate voting intention shall be counted corresponding to the system used in that election.
    2. Regardless of the number of positions, if the voter submits only a voting intention for STV, and instead FPTP is used, the Chairperson shall assign votes to the most preferred candidates corresponding to the number of positions to be filled.
    3. In a single-position election, if the voter submits only a voting intention for FPTP and instead STV is used, then their voting intention shall be interpreted as a single first-preference choice with no subsequent preferences.
    4. In a multi-position election, if the voter submits only a voting intention for FPTP and instead STV is used, the Chairperson shall assign randomly their unordered choices to become a first-preference, second-preference, etc.
    5. In any case, if the voting intention provided is invalid or unclear to the Chairperson, it shall be discarded.
    
16. Voting shall take place in the form of raised hands with all persons other than the Chairperson being instructed to obscure their vision, unless any of the following apply. If any of the following apply to an election, the election must be by secret, secure ballot either through paper or electronic means.

    1. One or more persons present (including eligible voters, candidates, and/or the Chairperson) indicate to the Chairperson at any time before the commencement of that election that they wish for the election to be by secret ballot, and/or
    2. The STV system of voting is duly being used for that election.
17. It shall be permitted for any eligible voter who is unable to vote synchronously in an election ("the absent voter") to nominate another eligible voter whom they trust to act as their proxy ("the proxy voter"), according to the following regulations.

    1. The proxy voter is permitted to cast an additional vote in accordance with the intention of the absent voter, although it is a matter for the absent voter to determine how to communicate their intention, which may be privately.
    2. In order for a proxy vote to be permitted, it must be registered with the Chairperson by the absent voter prior to that election, and the proxy voter must also give their consent. The Chairperson may set a deadline of no more than 7 days prior to the election for these registrations.
    3. The absent voter may cancel this proxy registration at any time up to the commencement of that election, provided it is properly communicated to the Chairperson. If an absent voter is subsequently able to vote synchronously in that election, their proxy registration (if any) shall be cancelled.
    4. It shall be prohibited for any person to act as a proxy voter for more than one other person.
    5. It shall be prohibited for any person who is not an eligible voter to act as a proxy voter for an eligible voter.

## Affiliations

1. The Society shall affiliate to external bodies only where membership of those bodies is essential to the fulfilment of the core aims, and only with the prior agreement of the Union’s Societies Network.

## Constitution and General Policies

The Constitution defines the aims and operation of the society for the foreseeable future, subject to modifications as outlined in section 11.2. For more short-term effect, General Policies may enacted by Members at a General Meeting, as outlined in section 11.1.

### General Policies

1. General Policies shall be defined as instructions to the Committee and/or members regarding the day-to-day running of the Society that need not require a change to the Constitution.
2. There shall be an official Society register of General Policies and their expiry dates, available to all members.
3. Any changes to General Policies can only be enacted by a quorate General Meeting, not solely by the Committee.
4. The Committee retains the right to create, amend, and revoke Committee Policies for itself. Committee Policies may not contradict General Policies, the Constitution, Union Byelaws, or any applicable legislation.
5. Any amendment to General Policies shall require support from a simple majority at a quorate General Meeting. A simple majority means that no less than one half of non-abstaining votes received at a quorate General Meeting must be affirmative.
6. Each General Policy shall expire two years and one month its after enactment or subsequent renewal (‘standard maximum expiry’), unless the enacting or renewing motion specifies an earlier expiry date, or is duly extended in accordance with (g).
7. A General Meeting may exceptionally amend the expiry date of an existing General Policy to exceed the standard maximum expiry.
   1. Such amendments require the support of two-thirds of non-abstaining votes at a quorate General Meeting (a ‘super majority’) for the policy to be amended.
   2. Such amendments may be passed during the same General Meeting in which the policy was initially created.
   3. Subsequent revocation of such policies shall be permitted with the usual simple majority.
   4. Subsequent amendments to the text of such policies will require a super majority, unless at the time of the proposed amendment the expiry date is no greater than the current standard maximum expiry, owing to the passage of time.
   5. Subsequent re-extension of such policies will require a super majority, unless the proposed new expiry date is no greater than the current standard maximum expiry, owing to the passage of time.
8. In the AGM preceding expiry, there shall be standing motions to renew each expiring policy. Expiring policy which is not renewed shall cease to have effect after its expiry. Policy may be renewed an unlimited number of times.
9. In any General Meeting, a motion may be proposed to revoke any policy, or to amend and/or extend it subject to sections (f) and (g) above.
10. The Committee and members shall be required to observe these General Policies. General Policy shall not intentionally contradict the Constitution. Where General Policy pre-dates a conflicting Constitutional amendment, or a conflict arises unintentionally, the Constitution shall take precedence. Where such a conflict is observed, it must be raised at the next General Meeting.

### Constitutional Amendments

1. Any amendment to this constitution shall require a two-thirds majority of the voting members (i.e. excluding abstentions) present at a properly constituted General Meeting.
2. All such amendments shall become valid only after approval by Student Council, or the appropriate delegated authority as duly determined by the present democratic structures of the Union.

## Annexes

The following document shall be kept as Annexes to the Constitution.

- Annex A. Schedule of decision-making hierarchy
